Hello, good morning everybody.
Good morning.
Good morning,
thank you so much for coming.
So this is session 112,
Writing Easy-To-Change Code:
Your Second-Most Important Goal
As A Developer.
And I'm Ken Kocienda.
And again, thanks for coming.
So this is a talk about writing code.
Unlike some other sessions
where you get some specifics
about new APIs or features,
this is sort of more general,
talking about writing
code day in and day out.
That's what I do.
I think that's what a lot of you do.
And so I think there's a lot of
interesting things to talk about.
In terms of making your code easy
to read and learn and understand
and maintain and easy to change.
Easy-to-change code.
Easy-to-change software.
I think that this is your
second most important goal.
So we'll get to the punchline right away.
What is the first most
important goal that you have?
I say, right?
What's your most important goal?
I say that is to ship products.
That's your most important goal and
this is certainly how we think at Apple.
I think some of you from the
applause you think that way as well.
And at Apple we've done over
30 iOS releases since 2007.
It's a huge amount of change
in a very short amount of time.
And so we've come up with some
ways to try to manage that change,
try to actually keep going at that pace.
Because after all,
releases are complicated.
There's all these things
that you need to juggle.
There's new hardware and there's
legal and there's new features
and there's tight schedules and
people are coming and going.
There's lots of things to kind of
juggle to keep those releases on track.
And so this talk is all about some
ideas to help you make change easier.
Some ideas that I try
to put into practice,
and I think that at Apple we
try to put into practice all
the time in developing software.
Right?
Because you're always
changing your software.
Try to make that change easy since you
always need to change your software.
And what kind of changes
am I talking about here?
Well, it's the typical stuff.
I mean, it's not anything really
all that surprising.
It's bug fixing and adding new
features and enhancing existing ones,
right?
Changing code that you wrote, yeah,
sometimes maybe six months ago.
You did something.
You were just hacking it
together to get a release done.
And you go back later and you say, "Gosh,
what is this even trying to do?" Right?
So if you kind of go up front
and think ahead of time to try to
make your code easier to change,
going back later won't be such a hassle.
Right?
And so for the rest of the talk,
I'll be talking about some
general conventions that apply to
whatever kind of software you're
developing on whatever platform,
but then also some Mac and
iOS-specific conventions.
So, that's the pitch.
I hope you are interested in staying.
For the rest of the talk,
I've structured things
along a series of topics,
or different angles,
different ways of looking
at this same idea of making
your software easy to change.
So, things to think about.
And here they are.
As you can follow along,
make a little checklist
perhaps as I'm going through.
Different ways of looking
at this same problem.
So, let's get started.
The first one is about style.
And I think that style
is more than skin deep.
Well,
what is kind of that skin deep level?
Well, I think the first thing we
think about when we think of
style is coding conventions.
And, you know, nothing, you know,
no rocket science here.
It's, you know,
I think we all have a style,
how we like to structure our if
statements and our parentheses
and capitalize things,
right?
But, um...
I think that while local
consistency is important,
I mean, you don't want different
styles of all those different
things in one block of code.
Local consistency is important, for sure.
But I think that's really
only the beginning of style.
"And real style runs deeper
than that." And so here I've got
a quote from a famous writer,
19th century writer.
"People think I can teach them style.
What stuff it all is.
Have something to say,
and say it as clearly as you can.
That's the only secret to style."
And so if I were to reduce
that slide down to one word,
here it is: clarity.
Clarity is what you should really
be striving for above anything else.
Because just like clear writing is easy
to understand when you're reading it,
I think that clear code
is easier to change.
And of course we're changing
our software all the time,
right?
So if you write your code clearly,
it'll be easier to change
later when you go back.
So what are the elements
of a clear coding style?
To be honest,
I could spend the rest of the
hour answering that question.
But to just pick out a couple
things for just this session,
I think good names and common idioms
are two good things to talk about.
Now when it comes to the first one,
good names, I think we all know that,
well, you know, a class,
the name of a class should
describe what the class does.
Same thing goes for a method.
A method should describe clearly
what the code in the method does.
So I'd like to look at a couple
of maybe sort of less common
ways of thinking about good
names and good descriptive names.
[Transcript missing]
And so I think if we change the
method to just be more descriptive,
it's now a lot clearer what it does.
If you go in back and put
this in the calling code,
it's very easy to see what that
yes/no is trying to communicate.
So again, good names are descriptive,
and not just where you typically think,
right, classes and methods,
but also little things,
just like variable names,
Boolean variables.
Okay, so that's good names.
Now a little bit about common idioms.
So now I would say that this line
of code is not very idiomatic,
right?
Try to take a look at that quickly.
My goodness,
what is this even trying to do?
Do you really want to count square
brackets when you're trying to
go and read a line of code to
try to understand what it does?
Very, very difficult to see
what that is trying to do.
If you rewrite that, again,
that idea of clarity,
you're not just communicating
to the compiler,
you're also communicating
to other developers and to
yourself six months from now.
So if you just take a little
time and rewrite that and
just make it a little clearer,
now it's easy to see what
the code is trying to do.
So rewrite those workhorse lines of code.
So, even more,
you want to read and understand
quickly beyond the scope
of a single line of code.
And I think this is an idea
that comes up quite a bit:
design patterns.
Well, what are design patterns?
These very common patterns that
we see in software quite a bit.
And we use these
throughout our frameworks.
At Apple, you use them if you
code on the Mac or iOS.
And what's more,
we've got these sort of Apple-specific
patterns that you see quite a bit.
And we add new ones when the
situation presents itself,
like the bottom one view controller.
So sort of this new design pattern that
we use all over iOS to help your job,
help make your job using
the frameworks easier,
making your apps easier to develop.
And so what's good about this?
It's that these idioms are
communicating to you at a high level.
If I say ViewController to you,
or if I say Observer,
or I say Delegation,
it communicates a whole
series of concepts to you.
If you put that name,
if you say FooDelegate,
you can see from the name of the class.
What that code is supposed to do
and what role it has in the system.
It communicates at a very,
very high level,
and you create this shared
vocabulary between you and other
people that you're coding with.
Again, sometimes even you and
yourself six months from now,
right, what a piece of code is
supposed to be doing.
So use those common idioms,
and as you're looking through
our developer documentation,
you'll see these names
coming up quite a bit.
If you see some name that
repeats itself quite a lot,
go and try to see what that
design pattern or that common
idiom is trying to communicate.
It'll really help you try to get to the
bottom of what our frameworks do and
how you can make the best use of them.
[Transcript missing]
So in your software,
let's say you have a bug.
Well, why do you have a bug?
A lot of times it's because there
was something that you didn't
anticipate or you didn't understand
about your code or somebody else's
code that you're depending on.
And so you have to go and debug, right?
Simple.
Here's a quote from a great
developer about debugging:
"Everyone knows that debugging
is twice as hard as writing
a program in the first place.
So if you are as clever as
you can be when you write it,
how will you ever debug
it?" Brian Kernaghan
Ryan Kernaghan, the K from KNRC, right?
So, well, let's say that, you know,
you get this bug, so your step one,
I guess you think, is, well,
you fire up the debugger.
What are you really looking for?
You see this bug and
you go into this bugger,
right?
What is it that you're hoping
the debugger will tell you?
And so before I fire up the debugger,
I like to take some time and think first.
How could a bug happen?
If a bug is happening in the software,
what situation could make the bug,
what could make the software
behave like I just saw?
That's wrong.
Go back to Brian Kernaghan,
the most effective debugging
tool is still careful thought,
coupled with judiciously
placed print statements.
It seems very old-fashioned, right?
But I admit that probably, you know,
Xcode Debugger,
we put a huge amount of investment in it,
it's a great tool,
but I have to say that 98% of the
time I debug with print statements.
I've written a lot of
software over my career,
and most of it has been
debugged with print statements.
And careful thought, that's really it,
because debugging, after all,
is understanding.
It's increasing your understanding
about how your code works.
It's not just jiggling code around
until the problem goes away.
Have you ever done this?
You use performSelector
with objectAfterDelay.
If I just take this line of
code and make it happen later,
maybe with zero, performAfterDelay zero,
make that code run at the
bottom of the run loop.
That's rarely right.
That's rarely the right answer.
It might make the bug go away,
but you probably just set a
little trap in your software that
you may just trigger later on.
Or if you do this,
if you just take two lines of
code and just switch their order,
bug's gone.
But why?
Why did that make the bug go away?
And I think that instead
of just doing that,
you should really try to have
a good understanding of why
your code change fixes the bug.
And you should be able to tell
a story about your bug fix.
Sometimes it's like
I investigate a bug and I go,
"Eureka, I think I understand
what's going on here now.
And before I even code the fix,
before I even write the
software to fix the bug,
I'll get up and go
tell somebody about it.
Go and tell my story."
Because a lot of times,
boy, when you think, you're sitting there
thinking at your desk,
it's like, "Oh,
this is a good idea." And then you try
to go and verbalize it to somebody.
Actually go and tell a story,
and it's like, "Nah,
that doesn't really make sense."
Or you go and maybe somebody else
is really the expert on the piece
of code that you're working on,
and they may have more understanding,
more knowledge that they
can bring to your story.
And again, maybe make it not seem
so solid and together.
Or the opposite.
Hopefully it is exactly
what needs to be done.
And then you go back to your
desk and you write the fix.
If you write it up,
go find yet a third person and tell that
same story again during the code review.
Spread that knowledge
throughout your team,
your organization.
And maybe you're doing this at 2:30 a.m.
and there's nobody around,
so instead maybe write that story
into your bug tracker somewhere
to capture that information
about that increase in bugs.
And then you go back to your software
and you try to get that increased
understanding about your software.
Because a lot of times, right,
a bug fix should be about anticipating
more and understanding better about
the environment your software lives
in and what it's trying to do.
So that's stories.
Next, laziness, or maybe what a lot of
you are thinking is,
"Just wake me when it's over."
[Transcript missing]
So now if we go and take a look at
the implementation of the init method,
a lot of times you'll see this,
where that singleton object needs
to use another singleton object to
go and deliver all of its features,
right?
So this init method calls
another singleton object.
And if we kind of go and we switch them,
right?
So we've got the foo
calls the bar controller.
And if we go over to the bar controller,
well, guess what?
Right?
The bar controller contains
a call to the foo controller.
So now we've got this little
circular bit of lazy initialization.
And this can cause an init storm,
because a lot of times it's not
just two controllers which have
a relationship to each other.
Sometimes you have a large
graph of controllers.
That all depend on each other.
And there are several problems to this.
One is you might get a long pause,
not at application startup,
so you solve one problem,
but you gave yourself another problem.
So now the first time the user
goes and accesses a feature,
there's a long stutter while all of these
objects go and instantiate themselves.
So you don't want long
pauses in your program,
obviously.
But there's a more difficult problem,
which is the order of
initialization problem.
I mean, depending from that code example,
depending on whether I access
the foo controller first or
the bar controller first,
the code is going to run
in a different order.
And that might not be known
while you're developing the code.
It might just be based on
what the user does first,
which features are used first.
And it makes it more difficult
to understand how your software
is going to behave and,
of course,
managing change in your software
also is complicated by that.
And yet there's one more
problem to lazy initialization,
which doesn't exist in this code,
which uses dispatch once to
go and allocate the instance
the first time this is called.
If you have some older code,
which was written before dispatch was
available on either the Mac or iOS,
you maybe wrote it like this.
Well, you're just checking to see whether
that instance has been assigned yet.
Not whether the object has been created,
but whether it's been
assigned to that instance.
And of course, that init,
that alloc and init,
will completely run its entire call
chain before that instance gets assigned.
You could actually, or if you're running
with multiple threads,
calling it to this controller,
you've got a big problem.
You might wind up with multiple
instances of a singleton.
Which is probably not what you want.
You wouldn't have written the
code like this if you could
have more than one instance.
So it's a problem.
It's a mess.
And so, well, what's the solution to...
This lazy initialization problem.
Unfortunately,
there are no silver bullets.
It really is kind of case by case.
But here are a couple of ideas.
You can think about maybe
doing a lightweight of all
of these controller objects,
and maybe not necessarily init them,
or maybe partially init them in
a lightweight way that doesn't
involve calls outside of the
class to other big components,
other big controllers.
Or you can decompose your controllers
better so that they don't rely
on each other quite so much.
Yet another idea is to have
alternative accessor patterns.
So instead of that shared instance,
you could have variations of
accessors to go get these singletons,
something like active instance,
which will only return the instance
if it's already been created.
It won't create it if it
hasn't been created yet.
This really helps you at program startup.
I've done this quite a bit,
and it's pretty successful.
All right.
Shared Instance or Create if needed.
It's just yet a more descriptive
name for that very same thing.
So laziness.
Think through your lazy initialization.
But do it so that your
program starts up quickly.
Okay, next.
Hygiene.
You make the mess, you clean it up.
So I think we can all accept, I mean,
this is true not only for WWDC, but,
right, it's sort of a little bit of a
little kernel of truth for a life.
Good hygiene takes effort, right?
And if we kind of try to
apply that to great writing,
right, E.B.
White, a great writer,
he says the best writing is rewriting,
right, going over,
iterating over your writing.
Now, in terms of code,
we also don't want to throw away code,
ever.
Are those things in conflict?
If the advice is to keep
iterating and rewriting things,
but then you don't want
to throw things away,
well, how do those two things relate?
Well,
I think that changes in your software
need to be part of a process.
There's kind of different
levels of changes,
different kinds of
change in your software.
And of course, again,
your first priority should be to ship.
And of course, kind of keeping your
code easy to change is,
I think, the best way to do that.
So, the secret here is not to
rewrite your code from scratch,
but to refactor.
And what is refactoring?
Well, I think that's maybe a lot
of things to a lot of people.
To try to fit it on one slide,
I think refactoring is keeping
the functionality of your code,
but just changing the form.
You don't change the behavior,
you just change the way
that things are written.
Saying the same thing,
but saying it with different words,
a different code.
Well, what about cruft?
I mean, I think we've all maybe worked
on projects where code just kind
of accretes all this junk in it,
and it's kind of hard to work with,
so you're tempted to just kind of
throw it away and start over again.
You get this code that's just
too difficult to work with.
But cruft is not any of these things.
It's not code you don't understand,
and it's not code you didn't write.
It's somebody else's problem,
not invented here problem.
And it's not code that
you don't like either.
Don't be tempted to just throw away code
that meets any of those characteristics.
But I do think there is a couple
things we can say about what's
genuine cruft with a very,
very high degree of confidence.
So what's genuine cruft?
Dead code.
Code that you've got in your
software which never gets called.
Maybe you had an old feature,
and you've superseded
it with a new feature,
and the code will now no longer run.
I think you should get rid of dead code.
It just gets in people's way.
You just have to read something,
and maybe if you're new to a project,
you're reading this
code to understand it,
and it never runs.
It's a waste of time.
So dead code is cruft.
The other thing is comments,
which no longer apply.
In other words,
the code and the comments don't match.
I think by definition it's the
comment that's wrong unless
there's a really bad bug.
A lot of times you write the
comment and then the code evolves
over time so that the comment no
longer matches what the code does.
And number three,
well there is no number three.
That's the only thing
that I can think of,
only two things I can
think of with really,
really high level of
confidence that's cruft.
So for the first one,
you can use the compiler
for dead code checks.
A lot of times when I'm
looking through my code and
I think that something is dead,
I'll just go comment out the
declaration and compile the code
and see if it's actually dead.
Now sometimes, of course,
you've got a lot of dependencies,
you might need to build other frameworks
or other apps or other projects,
right?
But this is a good way,
if you can actually
build all of the code,
it's a great way to see
if the code is dead.
the compiler will tell you.
And for comments,
I always like to go back and check them.
You know, sometimes there's, you know,
you might put a reference
to a bug in your code,
and the bug was filed 10 years ago.
You know, it may not be relevant anymore.
I mean, the software may have evolved
to the point where that
bug is now such a built-in,
or the fix to that bug is such
a built-in part of everyone's
conception of the software that
the comment just gets in the way.
People are tempted to go
and read in this thing,
and it's just like, oh,
I already know that.
That's the way the software works.
Right, so old comments,
you might even just delete them,
but particularly delete them
if they don't match the code.
Because the code itself
is accumulated knowledge.
Good comments are also
accumulated knowledge.
And when it comes to the
size of the changes to make,
I think the size of the change that
you want to make is really important.
So for small changes,
if I go and fix a bug and I see that
there's a name that could be improved,
even though changing the name
to something more descriptive
doesn't really have anything
to do with the bug fix per se,
I'll make that change and just write a
little extra note to the code reviewer.
Say, yeah, yeah,
it's not part of the change,
but I think this just is better.
I'm just going to kind
of clean up as I go.
Make the name,
improve names as you do other things.
For something medium, you know,
I think that once you get beyond
the scope of a small change,
a lot of times it's about
people skills more than anything
having to do with software.
If you're going to make a medium change,
go and talk to people on your team.
Think things through.
Decide.
Tell yourself a story about the code
change that you want to make and why.
Maybe changing a set of names,
moving some interfaces to something
that are maybe a little bit
cleaner and easier to maintain.
For things that are really large,
we should probably maybe even get up
and write something on the whiteboard.
Maybe even write a quick
little design document.
Put it in email.
Think about what your change
is in a more formal way.
I mean, I don't think that you
should be writing huge tomes,
right?
But if you kind of think things through,
and again,
it's really more about people skills than
it is about sort of software or coding.
Kind of deciding what you
want to do and coming up with
a good plan before you do it.
So kind of different scopes of change.
Of course, you always want to be aware of
regressions when you go and make changes.
That's what refactoring-- again,
refactoring in most cases,
is keeping the same
behavior in your software,
but just changing the form.
Of course, the best thing that you
can do is to have tests.
Right?
You all have tests, right?
You all have unit tests,
and performance tests,
and correctness tests for your whole app,
right?
If you don't, you should.
Tests make things-- makes
your code easy to change.
Gives you confidence.
[Transcript missing]
We have C, mostly C language family
programs that we write for iOS,
right?
GoTo.
Now, I think that notifications
are just a glorified GoTo.
But they're worse,
because you don't even say where to go.
Just post this notification
and somebody's going to be
listening for it out there.
At least you think.
Right?
But not only that,
you can go to more than one place,
because more than one hunk of code
can sign up for a notification.
So it's their go-to, even worse.
Now, why do I think this is even worse?
Well, one of the things that I think it
does is it frustrates code inspection.
Maybe you've written a bit
of code and you attach that
patch to an email to somebody,
and the code reviewer reading
that can't tell easily,
necessarily.
What that notification is going to do,
what code is going to run as a result
of a line of code being called.
You can't see many times
easily what code will run.
The behavior is non-deterministic
if you have more than one
callback for a notification.
The callbacks are unordered.
There's no guarantee that the
system makes that one client which
is signed up for a notification
will run before another.
So notifications, I think,
can complicate change.
Because it makes it more
difficult to understand what
your software is going to do.
Now, all that said, they're not all bad.
Because notifications can
promote loose coupling.
If two pieces of code can communicate
with each other and they don't
know directly about each other,
that can be a good thing.
Because you can change one
without necessarily having to
worry too much about the other.
And there are two really
good examples of that.
Model View Controller uses
notifications to communicate between
the different elements of MVC.
And Core Data uses notification
to communicate changes in data.
I think that if you can think
of your notifications in terms
of will and did notifications,
if you've got something and you
want to tell somebody else about it,
tell them some other
piece of code about it,
well then post, "I'm about to change this
variable notification." Then you
go and change the variable,
and then perhaps you
might even want to say,
"I just changed that
variable notification."
If you can think of your notifications
in terms of will and did,
giving some hooks to other pieces
of software to let them know about
pending changes and let them know
about changes which just happened,
that can be a really good
way to use notifications.
And I think a good piece of advice,
a lot of times for you,
since most of you are making apps instead
of Apple where we make frameworks and
APIs that you all are going to use in
ways that we may not really know about.
We're trying to make
a flexible framework.
If you're making an app,
I think a lot of times you
should know about the endpoints
for your notifications.
You should know who's sending it
and who's receiving it and why.
It's not just, "Well,
I think I'm going to put this
hook in there and I don't know
who may sign up for this."
If you know about the endpoints,
that helps you keep
control over notifications.
You should really think
twice about other uses.
If you don't know about the endpoints,
if it's something other than will or did,
really,
really think twice and think about
whether notifications are the best
way to get the job done because
code can be too loosely coupled.
If two pieces of code are
interacting with each other in
ways that are sort of non-standard,
not idiomatic,
not using a common pattern,
it can frustrate change,
make things more difficult to understand.
An option is to use protocols or
delegates instead of notifications.
If you think that two pieces of
code really are starting to get this
real relationship with each other,
make an interface out of it
or make a delegate out of it.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, next.
Optimization, the 3% solution.
Probably one of the most famous
quotations about computer
science from one of the most
famous computer scientists.
Donald Knuth says,
"We should forget about
small efficiencies,
say, 97% of the time.
Premature optimization is the root of
all evil." You've probably heard that.
So I got out my pencil,
sharpened my pencil,
and did a little bit of arithmetic.
Knuth says, "97% of the time." And so,
we should worry about premature
optimization 3% of the time.
Well, that's helpful.
Well, which 3% do I worry about?
Which 3%?
Well, if I kind of came up with a laundry
list of things which generally
speaking can be slow or might be slow.
Allocating tons of memory,
making a huge number of views, drawing,
or maybe I've got new code and
I haven't chosen algorithms really
well lately because I'm still thinking
about what the software should do,
blocking on information from other code.
A lot of times unnecessary work.
A lot of times you write a method
and later you go and look at it
in instruments in the debugger.
You wind up calling this method
again and again and again during a
single iteration of the run loop in
ways that you didn't think about.
You're just going and doing the
same work over and over again.
So those things can be slow.
But really, don't jump to conclusions.
Only optimize when you've
measured your software.
Use instruments.
It's a great tool.
It's right built into Xcode.
There's lots of different ways
that you can measure your software.
So definitely use instruments.
And only optimize when you
understand what instruments is
telling you about your software.
And I'd go even further to say
that as you're looking in the
profiles which Instrument gives you,
you should go and look and see what
the hottest functions are and optimize
the ones which you understand the best,
the ones which have the
clearest role in your program.
Very likely some new
code might be up there,
but instead, you might want to pick
instead the one that has,
you've been living with longer.
You know what the software is
supposed to be accomplishing.
And so here's an idea is that
you should optimize your slowest
and oldest 3% of your code.
Code that's been around the longest,
and it's the slowest.
You understand it the best.
Instruments is telling
you that it's slow.
There you go.
That's the code that you optimize.
And what that will help you to do is to
keep your newest code easy to change,
because a lot of times that's where the
features are still maybe provisional.
You don't understand quite so well
maybe what the code is supposed to do.
You haven't had enough time
to go in and clean things up,
make things work as
efficiently as possible.
So keep your newest
code easiest to change.
And trades are okay.
So I have a story about years ago,
I was an early developer on
the Safari project and going
and making the web browser.
Our goal was to make a
very fast web browser,
and eventually, we succeeded.
But in the beginning,
the browser was slow.
So well,
how do you make a slow program fast?
And so we came up with this
idea that we were going to
never make the program slower.
So from very, very early on,
I developed this tool that allowed
us to go and just run through a
series of URLs and give timings on
how fast the pages were loading.
And so we ran this test every single day.
And so we knew on a 24-hour or more,
24 hours was the largest
amount of time that would pass
before we would run the test.
A lot of times we ran it
before we even checked code in.
And so we decided that we would never,
ever, ever let the program get slower,
even as we were adding features.
And this is where the trades comes in.
So we added a feature and make
the browser behave more correctly
in the way that it needs to.
But how do you do that if it winds
up making the program slower?
Well, we did what I just said.
We went and optimized the oldest
and slowest 3% of the code.
So we went and found a little
bit of headroom someplace
else to pay for this new code,
this new feature that we added.
And we decided that this was okay to do.
It made sense.
This was a good way to go
and make the software faster.
And it helped us to really
keep that rule in place.
Never, ever, ever,
ever make the software slower.
Don't convince yourself that it's
okay because I'm adding a new feature
so a little performance hit is okay.
It's not okay.
Never make your program slower.
And it can only either stay the
same or it's going to be slower.
And it can only either stay
the same or it's or get faster,
right?
It's simple logic.
Right, so the sort of the lather, rinse,
repeat recipe here is right, change,
test, measure, and optimize, and repeat.
And that's optimization.
So next, dependencies.
Don't call us, we'll call you.
So me, I'm worried.
I'm kind of paranoid, right?
I'm nervous when I go
and change software.
I'm worried about, well,
what are the implications of
this change that I just made?
Particularly,
sometimes I sort of parachute
in on somebody else's project
and go and jiggle things around,
right, in my own way.
I'm worried about, who did I just break?
What bug did I just introduce
by adding this new code?
I always am worried about
limiting the collateral damage.
And so here's a couple of tips on how
to do that from a design point of view,
from a code design point of view.
Inheritance trees and call graphs.
So about inheritance trees,
I think the simple rule
is shallow is better.
I think we've decided at Apple in
making our frameworks that we don't
want to wind up with these deep,
deep, deep inheritance hierarchies.
We try to keep them as
shallow as possible.
And why is that, right?
Because if you wind up with these
layers and layers of overridden methods,
a lot of times you've got to go
into the middle or sometimes even
to the root of the inheritance
hierarchy and make a change in
software that's being overridden.
And now you have to think
about are people just doing
straight up overrides on this?
Are they supposed to be
calling super in their,
you know, in their overridden methods?
How does -- if they are calling super,
what does my change do for that
code in the overridden method?
If they're not calling super,
how do they maybe wind up getting
this bug fixer feature that I just
put up in the overridden -- in the,
you know, in the method way up at
the top of the hierarchy?
Right?
So this is complicated.
It complicates change,
having a deep inheritance hierarchy.
Right?
And so the solution or a solution to
this is where possible to use delegation,
design your classes so that
they have delegates when -- in
the points of the code where
interesting work is getting done.
So what is delegations?
It's customizing by
calling another object.
You define what kind of the interesting
things that you might want another
object to have a role in delivering,
and you have that other
object do that work.
And it keeps the
conceptual overhead small,
because you decide up front,
this is the kind of interesting
work that this class does,
which might be customized
by another class.
So instead of adding to
the inheritance hierarchy,
you add additional delegates.
And the great thing about this is
that you can vary that customization
at runtime as you need it.
You can make a class behave
in two different ways simply
by changing the delegate.
I mean,
I think a great example of that is just
going and removing a delegate that winds
up responding to maybe button presses.
If you just remove the delegate and
replace it with nil implementations,
the button will be disabled.
You update its user interface,
it's nice and easy to sort of enable
and disable user interface controls
by varying the delegate at runtime.
Object becomes active again,
reassign the delegate that does the work,
and you're good to go.
[Transcript missing]
Because it helps you to limit includes.
If you limit includes in your software,
you get a bonus of faster compile times,
particularly if you have
a bunch of C++ code.
Compiler takes a longer amount
of time to compile C++ than
straight C or Objective-C,
so you get faster compile times,
which is great.
More turns of the edit, compile,
debug cycle in your brain.
But more than that,
I try to strive for unidirectional
calling when I design two classes
that need to interact with each other.
And so here's an example.
I have two classes,
a foo class and a bar class,
and you can see they message each other.
So now if you go and
look at the Foo example,
I'm going to go and change an interface.
Now, of course,
since Barr calls that method,
I need to go and update all the callers,
right?
So this is potentially complicated,
particularly in a big framework.
If you need to change an interface, well,
now you need to go and
change all the callers,
and you need to make sure
that you've got everybody,
even independent frameworks that
maybe you don't develop every day.
Right, so I think a different way is if
you can rethink the relationship
between these two classes.
Instead of just foo and bar,
two classes which are friends,
if you have master and slave instead.
So not only is the name more descriptive,
right, but the relationship between
the code is sort of clear and
is communicated in the names.
Now, what this means, of course,
is that now if I go and change
that gold interface in master,
if I decide to decompose that,
refactor that,
so it's not just change now,
I've now broken it up into a data
receive and a data process step,
I don't need to go and change the slave.
It doesn't matter.
I'm free to change that master
without having to worry about the
collateral damage in the slaves.
The slave doesn't depend on the master.
I always try to strive for unidirectional
calling between two classes if I can.
Keep those call graphs shallow, small.
Next, mixing.
So, Model-View-Controller,
I think it's a really neat concept.
It keeps separate things separate,
the data in your program,
the visual representation of the program,
and the way to mediate between them.
It's a good design because
you don't mix these model and
view changes in the same code.
Helps to keep your code easier to change.
Same model can have then later on
two different visual representations.
Makes great sense if you're
doing iOS development,
you have the same model,
different view system on
the iPhone and iPod Touch,
and then a different one on the iPad.
So that's, I think, a pretty good idea.
Even more generally,
I say you shouldn't mix different
things in your software.
Don't mix different things.
Like, for instance, computation and I.O.
If you're receiving data
from over the network,
don't do any important,
interesting work on it at the
place where you received the data.
Do that elsewhere.
Don't mix your algorithms
and data sources,
which is sort of another way
of saying the same thing.
UI in a specific screen resolution.
Because again, we wind up changing
the screen resolution.
Or in the case of iPhone developers,
along came the iPad.
Because we wind up changing.
New hardware, new products.
So don't just hard-code in.
Don't bake in the notion of
a specific screen resolution.
Or your user interaction in a
particular interface pattern.
What's very common, of course,
in the iPhone is to have apps
which show data's in screenfuls.
And we've got this
side-to-side navigation.
Along comes the iPad.
And a lot of that same functionality
is then implemented in popovers.
So don't bake in that
side-to-side notion.
Because it complicates change
when the world changes around you.
I'm conflicted about
lines of code like this:
set editing which seems
sort of model-ish,
and animations which
seem somewhat view-ish.
I think this is maybe
mixing a little too much.
Should you really hard code
animations in your code?
So I've got a story about
multitasking gestures,
the new feature for iOS 5.
I don't know if you've
tried them out yet,
the sort of swipe side to
side to switch between apps,
and sort of the hand-closing gesture to
go back to the home screen from an app.
Well, I did a lot of the work
for multitasking gestures.
And of course,
this is a big change to how the
system works that we came up with
in version 5 of the software.
And it turns out that in SpringBoard,
getting an app to launch sort of
behind the scenes as you swipe
side to side without that launch
animation was really hard to do
because we baked in the notion of,
oh, well, on iOS,
and when an app launches,
it does this animation up from the icon.
That's just how it works.
But we change how the system works.
So this is a case where we baked
in this notion of animation,
and it turned out to be pretty
difficult to go and disentangle that
to make the system work differently.
So that's a lesson in
change management for us,
for sure.
So don't mix different things.
App launching and animations
are two different things.
Don't mix different things.
And that's mixing.
Next, expectations,
or how do I work this thing?
I think bugs are disappointments.
Maybe that's something that would
be better discussed with my analyst,
but I'm also often disappointed
with bugs in the software.
It's like I expected A and you did B,
and I'm all sad now.
I have to figure out why.
Of course,
this is now a good general rule of thumb,
Postal's Law,
be conservative in what you send,
be liberal in what you accept.
I think that applies to app development
and not just network programming.
Right,
and this idea of hard to use wrong,
if I'm going to develop an interface,
a code interface that all
of you are going to use,
I would like to think that it's
difficult to use that interface wrong.
It's hard to use wrong.
And so I've got a couple of
ideas about how to make code
that's hard to use wrong.
One is method arguments,
and the other is assertions
and early returns.
Well, if we look at assertions,
we look at this method argument here,
and I put it together with an assertion.
So I say, if you call this method, well,
it's wrong.
It's simply wrong to call this method.
I've decided, as the interface provider,
that it's an error to call
this method without a view.
The software will break.
So if you're using the assertions
that we provide as part of foundation,
your software will go into the
debugger while you're debugging it,
which is good.
You'll fix that bug before
you ship to customers.
So assertions are great.
Put them in your software.
[Transcript missing]
Now, what about IVARs?
IVARs bring up an interesting point, too.
And I think we'll all accept
that global variables are bad.
And why are they bad?
Because the scope is too broad.
A change to that global variable can
affect all of the code in your program.
But I think that IVAR scope
can also be too broad,
particularly in a large class.
If you have a big class,
one of those singleton
controller objects,
An IVAR can be really,
really difficult to manage,
and you may need to understand a
lot about that IVAR in order to
make sure that you understand how
the software is supposed to work.
So I've got some rules
of thumb for IVARs.
Generally speaking,
have as few of them as possible.
Try to design your code so that you're
not just squirreling away little bits of
state in the scope of the whole class.
I try to have simple life cycles,
getters and setters.
Don't have complicated life
cycle transitions for IVARs,
if possible.
And avoid tight relationships
between multiple IVARs.
Don't have IVAR at the state of
IVAR A depend on the state of IVAR B,
where possible.
Right, and avoid letting non-setter
methods change IVARs.
I mean,
this is tempting a lot of times because,
you know, you may want a function that
computes the value of an IVAR,
but since a C function
can only return one value,
you might be tempted to have a sort of
an update state method which goes and
changes a bunch of different IVARs,
and that can be difficult to understand,
particularly later if you're
trying to change that code or
if you're trying to learn it,
what that method actually does.
So, if you've got hard-to-manage
IVAR state already in your code,
and maybe you're going
to try to refactor,
using a state machine
might be a good idea.
This is even a good idea if you're
going to design a class from scratch.
Use a state machine.
UI Gesture Recognizers in
UIKit implements a state machine
to implement its functionality.
Of course,
that's expressed to you in the API,
how you wind up getting your callbacks.
You wind up asking the
gesture what state it's in:
possible, or record that changed,
or canceled, or ended.
And it was such a good idea that
that's how I implemented--there's
no API for this,
but this is how I implemented
multitasking gestures in Springboard,
using a state machine.
All right, so state machines,
how do they help?
Well,
they help you to think things through.
And they help you to limit possibilities.
If you've only got a
specific number of states,
there is no in-between.
You can't read in-between the lines.
You've got to transition
between one state to another.
And states also help
you to make assertions.
Some of those assertions you
might add to your code is,
well, this function can only be called
if the class is in a certain state.
If not, I'm asserting.
It's wrong to call in the wrong state.
And later, right,
because this is all about change, right,
so you implement the state machine
and then later you realize it
doesn't do everything that you want.
You need to add a feature.
Well,
you've just made your life easier because
all you do then is you add a state and
you then you think through what are all
the transitions between all the existing
states and the new state that I'm adding.
What makes sense?
Can you get there from here?
So state machines help you to
manage change and make your
code harder to use wrong,
even in internal implementation.
So, wrapping up,
10 things to think about.
Clear code.
Your bug fixes should tell a story.
Lazy initialization:
Keep control of that where possible.
It's good.
You want quick-launching programs,
but it's not magical.
Refactor instead of rewriting.
Don't overuse notifications.
Use them for the right things.
Keep your newest code easy to change.
Optimize your slowest and oldest code.
Limit dependencies.
It's not about just like not working
and playing well with others,
right?
Just trying to keep your
code easy to change.
Don't mix different things and
make code that's hard to use wrong.
So, 10 things to think about,
and I hope those will help.
And thank you for coming.